---
title: darktable-generate-cache
id: darktable-generate-cache
weight: 30
draft: false
author: "people"
---

The `darktable-generate-cache` binary updates darktable's thumbnail cache. Invoke this program to generate all missing thumbnails in the background when your computer is idle.

`darktable-generate-cache` can be called with the following command line parameters:

```
darktable-generate-cache
              [-h, --help]
              [--version]
              [--min-mip <0-7>] [-m, --max-mip <0 - 7>]
              [--min-imgid <N>] [--max-imgid <N>]
              [--core <darktable options>]
```

All parameters are optional. If started without parameters `darktable-generate-cache` uses reasonable defaults.

`-h, --help`
: Display usage information and terminate.

`--version`
: Display copyright and version information and terminate.

`--min-mip <0 - 7>, -m, --max-mip <0 - 7>`
: darktable can store thumbnails with up to eight different resolution steps for each image. These parameters define the maximum resolutionw which should be generated (defaults to a range of 0-2). There is normally no need to generate all possible resolutions here; missing ones will be automatically generated by darktable the moment they are needed. When asked to generate multiple resolutions at once, the lower-resolution images are quickly downsampled from the highest-resolution image.

`--min-imgid <N>, --max-imgid <N>`
: Specifies the range of internal image IDs from the database to work on. If no range is given, `darktable-generate-cache` will process all images.

`--core <darktable options>`
: All command line parameters following `--core` are passed to the darktable core and handled as standard parameters. See the [darktable binary](./darktable.md) section for a detailed description.

