---
title: editing an image - display referred workflow
id: edit-display-referred
draft: false
weight: 40
author: "people"
---

The _display-referred_ workflow places more emphasis on doing pixel processing in the non-linear _display-referred_ part of the [pixelpipe](../../darkroom/processing-modules-and-pixelpipe/_index.md). By default it uses the [_base curve_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/base-curve.md) module to transition into this display-referred space, although other tone-mapping tools such as [tone curve](../../module-reference/processing-modules/tone-curve) are possible. Many modules are moved later in the pipeline after this tome mapping transiaiton so that they work with gamma-encoded display-referred values rather than linear scene-referred pixel values. This is a legacy mode to provide backward-compatibility with previous edits, and to allow users to continue with their former way of working without forcing them into using the newer scene-referred workflow.

Most of the basic steps required to develop images under the _display_referred_ workflow are quite similar to the _scene-referred_ workflow. The main difference lie in the choice of modules, and the order they appear in the pixel pipeline.  To see the difference in the ordering of the modules between the _display-referred_ and _scene-referred_ workflows, please refer to the appendix on [module order](../../special-topics/module-order.md).

white balance
: the [_white balance_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/white-balance.md) this works the same as in _scene-referred workflow, and by default uses the white balance coefficients provided by the camera. If this does not give acceptable results, use the camera presets or do a spot white balance. The temperature slide can be used to basic adjustments to make the image "warmer" or "cooler". More advanced color grading is better left to other modules discussed later.

exposure correction
: The [_exposure_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/exposure.md) module works the same as in _scene-referred_ mode, but the way you use it is a little different. In _display-referred_ mode, you need to make sure you don't blow out your highlights too much, and rather use the [_base curve_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/base-curve.md) to adjust the middle tones if needed. An alternative is to `click+drag` on the histogram, but this gives less control than using the _exposure_ module slider. While you can use the _exposure_ module to tweak the black level to supply more contrast, you need to be very careful doing this as you can end up with negative RGB values. It is better to increase the contrast by adjusting the toe of the _base curve_, however this can be a little fiddly and it is one of the reasons why the [_filmic_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/filmic-rgb.md) module was introduced to darktable. 

Noise reduction
: As for _scene-referred_ workflow, the best starting point for noise reduction is [_profiled denoise_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/denoise-profiled.md). This module offers an almost “single-click” solution to fight noise. From a user perspective the effect only depends on camera type and ISO value, both derived from Exif data. All other settings are taken from a database of noise profiles that the darktable team has collected – now covering well above 200 popular camera models. In addition you have several other options in darktable to reduce noise. There is [_raw denoise_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/raw-denoise.mf), denoising based on bilateral filter, denoising based on [_non-local means_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/denoise-non-local-means.md), and [_contrast equalizer_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/contrast-equalizer.md), which is based on wavelets. If your camera is not yet supported by _profiled denoise_, denoising based on _non-local means_ is probably the most convenient, as it allows you to treat color and luminance noise separately.

Fixing spots
: Same as in _scene-referred_ workflow, sometimes you will need to remove spots caused by sensor dirt. The [_spot removal_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/spot-removal.md) module and the [_retouch_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/retouch.md) module are at hand and can also correct other disturbing elements like skin blemishes. If your camera has stuck pixels or tends to produce hot pixels at high ISO values or longer exposure times, have a look at the [_hot pixels_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/hot-pixels.md) module for automatic correction.

Geometrical corrections
: Quite frequently you want to only show part of the captured scene in your image, eg. to take away some disturbing feature close to the frame. In other cases, the horizon in the image may need levelling, or there are perspective distortions. All this can be corrected with full manual control in the [_crop and rotate_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/crop-rotate.md) module. For a fully automatic correction of perspective distortions you may alternatively visit the [_perspective correction_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/perspective-correction.md) module. If you need to correct typical camera lens flaws like cushion distortion, transversal chromatic aberrations or vignetting, there is a [_lens correction_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/lens-correction.md) module. All these work the same as in _scene-referred_ workflow.

Bringing back detail
: Digital raw images often contain more information than you can see at first sight.  Especially in the shadows of an image, there are lots of hidden details. The [_shadows and highlights_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/shadows-and-highlights.md) module helps bring these details back into visible tonal values. Structural details in fully blown-out highlights, by nature of the digital sensor, can not be recovered. However, you can correct unfavorable color casts in these areas with the [_highlight reconstruction_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/highlight-reconstruction.md) module. Additionally the [_color reconstruction_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/color-reconstruction.md) module is able to fill overexposed areas with suitable colors based on their surroundings. The [_filmic rgb_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/filmic-rgb.md) can also offer highlight reconstruction, but be sure to disable _base curve_ first.

Adjusting tonal values
: Almost every workflow is likely to include adjusting the image's tonal range. darktable offers several alternative modules to take care of that. The most basic one is the [_contrast brightness saturation_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/contrast-brightness-saturation.md) module. In the [_tone curve_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/tone-curve.md) module, tonal values are adjusted by constructing a gradient curve. The [_levels_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/levels.md) and [_rgb levels_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/rgb-levels.md) modules offer a concise interface, with three markers in a histogram. In addition, there is a [_zone system_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/zone-system.md) module which allows control over tonal values by zones, inspired by the work of Ansel Adams. And of course, there is nothing to stopping you from using the [_filmic_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/filmic-rgb.md) module in a display-referred workflow if you so wish (after disabling [_base curve_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/base-curve.md)).

Enhancing local contrast
: Local contrast enhancement can emphasize detail and clarity in your image. Carefully used, it can give your photograph the right pop. darktable offers several modules for this task. The [_local contrast_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/local-contrast.md) module is easy to handle, with just a few parameters. A much more versatile, but also more complex, technique is offered by the [_contrast equalizer_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/contrast-equalizer.md) module. Have a look at its presets, to get a feeling for how it works. Equalizer is darktable's "Swiss Army Knife" for many adjustments where spatial dimension plays a role. The location of this module in the pixel pipeline differs significantly between the _scene-referred_ and _display-referred_ workflows.

Color adjustments
: darktable offers many modules for adjusting colors in an image. A very straightforward technique is implemented in the [_color correction_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/color-correction.md) module. Use it to give an image an overall tint or to adjust overall color saturation. The [_color zones_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/color-zones.md) module offers a much finer control to adjust saturation, or lightness, and even hue, in user defined zones. darktable's [_tone curve_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/tone-curve.md) module -- in addition to the classical adjustment of tonal values -- gives you fine control over the colors in an image. Finally, if you intend to convert an image into black & white, a good starting point, with an easy to use and intuitive user interface, is offered by the [_monochrome_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/monochrome.md) module. Alternatively, you might consider using darktable's [_channel mixer_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/channel-mixer.md).

Sharpening
: If you start your workflow from a raw image, you will need to have your final output sharpened. The [_sharpen_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/sharpen.md) module can do this with the classical USM (unsharp mask) approach, available in most image processing software. Another very versatile way to enhance edges in an image is offered by the [_highpass_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/highpass.md) module, in combination with darktable's rich set of [_blending_](../../darkroom/masking-and-blending/blend-modes.md) operators.

Artistic effects
: darktable comes with a rich set of artistic effect modules. To name just a few: with the [_watermark_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/watermark.md) module you add an individual watermark to your image. The [_grain_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/grain.md) module simulates the typical noise of classical analogue footage. Use the [_color mapping_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/color-mapping.md) module to transfer the look and feel of one color image onto another. darktable's [_low light_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/lowlight-vision.md) module allows to simulate human vision to make lowlight pictures look closer to reality. The [_graduated density filter_](../../module-reference/processing-modules/graduated-density.md) adds a neutral or colored gradient to your image for exposure and color correction.  

