---
title: external raster mask
id: external-raster
weight: 10
---

Generate a raster mask from a `.pfm` to be used by subsequent processing modules.

---

**Note**: `.pfm` files are not very common but darktable and GIMP can both generate such files. Both grayscale and RGB files are supported.

---

# usage

[Raster masks](../../darkroom/masking-and-blending/masks/raster.md) are automatically created whenever you define a [mask](../../darkroom/masking-and-blending/masks/overview.md) within a processing module, for subsequent re-use in modules further up the pixelpipe. In some cases you might want such a mask to be generated by other software, for example to make use of software that can isolate a subject from its background, or simply to add some background pattern.

Using this module, external raster mask files are made available as a raster mask very early in the pixel pipeline. They can be of any dimension/size and are always scaled to the size of the currently developed image. Please note, however, that since raster masks are distorted by modules like [_orientation_](./orientation.md) the external raster mask dimensions should always have the same orientation as the original raw file sensor data.

# module controls

file selection
: Choose the external raster file to use. File selection is inactive if the rasterfile root folder has not been defined in [preferences > processing](../../preferences-settings/processing.md).

mode
: Choose any of the RGB channels, or a combination of them, to generate the raster mask from.
